## About The Project

### Project: Data Lake
#### Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

#### Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. You'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

#### Project Datasets
You'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

```
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data

Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
```

##### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json

song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1,
 "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7",
 "artist_latitude": null,
 "artist_longitude": null,
 "artist_location": "",
 "artist_name": "Line Renaud",
 "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1",
 "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff",
 "duration": 152.92036,
 "year": 0}
```

##### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

### Repo Contents

README.md : This file, explaining the purpose and usage of the Repo

LICENCE.txt : Details of the licence for this project

etl.py : The pipeline itself

Interactive.ipyb : A Jupyter notebook used to debug etl.py interactively

### Built With

* PySpark
* AWS - EMR / S3

## Getting Started

To get a local copy up and running follow these simple steps.

### Prerequisites

* An EMR cluster on AWS (recommended), or a local Spark session
* A Pyspark IDE
* A dwh.cfg file must be present in the same location as the project files, using the following format:

```
[AWS]
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID =
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY =
```

The empty fields must be completed with the relevant information from your own IAM role with S3 access.

### Installation

1. To clone the repo:

```
git clone git@github.com:sama26/Udacity_Data_Lake.git (SSH)

or

git clone https://github.com/sama26/Udacity_Data_Lake.git (HTTPS)
```

## Usage

1. Launch a Spark EMR cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.

2. Add IAM role info to dwh.cfg.

3. Update the input and output paths in etl.py as required

4. Run etl.py - if using AWS EMR you'll need to do this inside a Jupyter notebook attached to the cluster

5. Delete your EMR cluster when finished.

## Contributing

Feel free to contribute if you really want, but I have no plans to come back to this project:

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/FeatureName`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some feature'`)
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/FeatureName`)
5. Open a Pull Request
